Pushkin.
>> So I I went to California
at your behest.
>> Did I wish
>> because
>> first of all
>> I know you wish that you had been there
yourself because this is your your
favorite place.
>> This is this is one really hurt and I'm
um
>> we should just say where where we're
talking about.
>> Okay. No, I sent you, Ben, on a mission
because I couldn't go because my wife
would leave me if I took one more trip
basically. And so with a heavy heart, I
handed the reigns to one of my favorite
places in America, which is the food lab
at Matson. Matson is like
Matson's like the R&D. If you if you're
a food company in America and you want
to do something new or cool, you maybe
you try it in your own lab, but mostly
what you do is you pick up the phone and
you call Matson out in out in the Bay
Area and you say, "Can you make me and
fill in the blanks the most delicious
potato chip that also prices, you know,
is priced under X or
>> they got like the walls the walls are
lined with like a pantry shelf of just
like every product you've ever had and
enjoyed and And like I they're like
franas on there. It's it's just like all
the hits. Things that I can't even
mention because they're ND8 are on the
walls.
>> Oh my god. It's like if you walk through
a grocery store after going to Matson,
you're like, "Oh, that's Matson. Oh,
that's Madson." Oh. And you realize my
diet is basically Madson.
I interviewed two people out there who
you know of course from other
revisionist history episodes. Steve
Gundrum, their chief AI officer, who was
at the time of our first mistake the CEO
and knows everything about why we like
what we do.
>> And Carecake became a phenomena at first
because of the airlines
>> and Barbara Stucky, their chief new
product strategy officer, who's an old
hand on revisionist and is just a font
of amazing tales from the Matson
archives. In the case of this, the
challenge was if you've ever opened a
pomegranate, it's not exactly you can't
squeeze the pomegranate.
>> Like I I've really you I've really met
someone who is clearly so psyched to go
to work everyone. Do you get that sense?
>> She's she was so pumped. It was I found
it so delightful. She's so excited and
like a and a true believer in in this
amazing sense in what they do.
>> I want I want to take my when they're
old enough. take my two daughters out to
the Bay Area and I want Barb to do a
version of take your daughter to work
day only take my daughters to work day
and I want my daughters to observe what
it means to be psyched about your job.
So I sent you out there now why Ben you
tell us what was why did I send you out
there? So, you sent me out there because
you had reached out to Barb about a
mistake that has loomed very large over
the entire food industry that she wanted
to tell us about.
And so the story is basically
Barb, who's more excited than anyone
you've ever met to go to work every day,
is going to work in 2018, 2018, 2019
area,
>> and is at a conference where she comes
face to face with the future of the food
industry and then realizes that the food
industry is about to commit Harry Kerry
on a on a much broader scale than even
McDonald's and she has to try and stop
it. Uh and and so it is the story of of
two mistakes. The first one a mistake
that we made in the '90s and the second
one a mistake that Barb is trying to
stop us from making today.
Welcome to Revisionist History. I'm Ben
Natafrey and in this our final episode
of the Mistake series, Malcolm sends me
out to California to the pantheon of
food science, the hallowed halls of
Matson. It's a place you may remember
from way back in season 2, episode 9,
McDonald's broke my heart, all about
McDonald's French fries. But my mission
wasn't as greasy. I was sent to Madson
for a more cultivated reason.
Okay, so our story begins in 2018.
Barb's at this conference for an amazing
new technology that everyone's calling
lab grown meat and she starts to get
this pit in her stomach. It was really
the year where this technology was
starting to happen and companies were
figuring out how they were going to
isolate the cells that they wanted to
use to make the type of meat that they
wanted to use. Um, and it was just
mindblowing. So, the idea here is very
simple. It is to be able to make
meat by using cells of meat to make more
meat. And that idea just it it to me it
was just brilliant.
>> And also no no animals will suffer and
there's not you know factory farming
things like this you won't have
>> so many things that we don't have to
worry about anymore. It can be done
inside. So it just seemed it seemed like
magic. It it just felt like something's
happening here.
>> This would be like huge for me because
my wife is an ethical vegetarian and if
I could tell her that there was nothing
killed in producing meat that we were
eating, I would suddenly be eating meat
again at home, which would be thrilling.
>> Steak would return.
>> Steak would return and not just when
Julia's out. Um,
>> but there's like there are all sorts of
there are all sorts of potential upsides
to this technology and Barb's just
sitting there thinking about them.
>> There's like 10 different environmental
reasons why we would want to cattle
farming is one of the single greatest
contributors to global warming. It sucks
up enormous amounts of water,
>> methane emissions.
>> Methane emissions. I mean, you could you
could make a case that replacing the
cattle industry with something that
comes out of a lab would be one of the
single biggest things we could do in
favor of of of the environment. I mean,
there's no
>> there's like there's obviously there's
like runoff to run off from cattle farms
that
>> fertilizer. I mean,
>> so there's there are all these like huge
upsides and Barb, who's you know, the
person who's most excited to go to work,
is just thrilled about this. However,
there was a problem. It started with an
image and I'm going to show you the
image.
>> So, we're looking at a a a petri dish of
what looks like a a perfectly round
patty of raw ground beef.
>> Yes. And to me, having it in a petri
dish,
>> not good.
>> Not at all appealing, delicious, or
anything I want to put in my body. And
already like raw meat is not something I
see and think. Not super appealing.
>> Not so sexy. So I sat through the
conference and it was probably three or
four days and I kept hearing these terms
cell-based meat,
lab grown meat. And it just I I was so
horrified by the language that I grabbed
the executive director and I just, you
know, pulled on his jacket and I said,
"Can we talk? I think that we need to
work on the naming and the communication
around this technology that if we don't
do it now and we don't explain it right
and we don't bring the consumer along
from the beginning, we're going to end
up like GMOs and nobody's going to want
to use GMOs in their formulations and
consumers are not going to want to eat
it and and we're going to lose this
possibility of progress in terms of
feeding the world. I have tasted meat
made this way and and I was shocked at
how much it tastes like real meat.
>> But it's not No one's going to get there
if it's called lab grown meat.
>> Exactly.
>> Going to end up like GMOs, which is our
first mistake. That's after the break.
So the first mistake we had to talk to
Steve who was the CEO at the time. Um,
and
it starts in the 1990s,
late 90s, early 2000s, when a company
called Zenica, now known as Astroenica,
so co of the COVID vaccine fame,
>> approaches Matson and says, "We have
created a genetically modified tomato
and we need your help."
>> We're here to talk about the story of
the tomato. Mhm.
>> I mean what what why did the why did
this GMO tomato exist? What problem what
problem was it solving?
>> It was all about harvesting and
transportation and processing. So um
tomatoes by their very nature are
delicate. So the most optimum tomatoes
for the hydonics and the organics and
how it tastes and you know all all those
criteria
were very difficult to harvest
economically
>> because you had if you let it ripen on
the vine you had
>> too long.
>> It was a very short window in which you
could ship it or and it was easier to
puncture.
>> Yes, exactly. They became delicate. They
were harder to harvest.
Basically, it's like tomatoes are a
really difficult crop because if you
pick them ripe, then they're very soft.
You have lower yields because you're
using these huge combines to harvest
them. And so, you're likely to lose a
lot of tomatoes, which then drives up
the price of the tomatoes that you do
ship. And then you're shipping these
ripened tomatoes, which means they have
a very short time to get to wherever
they're going to be sold and then used.
So, the way they would handle this,
there were a few ways people handled
this, but one way was that you would
literally pick a tomato green, ship it
green because it was firmer and not yet
ripe, and then gas it with ethylene gas
before it hit the market shelves, which
gave it this sort of red look that you
expect from a tomato. So, it was like
overall a suboptimal situation for
tomato lovers. and GMOs which are
genetically modified organisms first
developed uh to make human insulin and
then in 1994 it's applied to food stuffs
and the first thing that gets approved
by the FDA is a tomato. It's called the
flavor saver tomato which is basically
trying to solve this basic problem of
how you like pick and ship tomatoes. So
there's an this is one of those first
GMO products that Zenica brings to
Matson and what they're asking Matson to
do is not develop the tomato which
they've designed basically with the end
use of purees
uh soups things like that
>> but basically solve this crucial problem
of GMOs which is how do you get
consumers on board? How do you get
people to like buy into this thing? It's
funny because I was in the early 90s
covering the FDA for the and NIH for the
Washington Post. So I was writing about
all these early things in that period.
And I feel like the it was there was
predictable. It was predictable in the
sense that there was always going to be
um people suspicious of
um of genetic modification on all
levels, right? because it was so new
back then. I mean, you have to
understand it's now we're we're we've
you know, we've had 30 years of this,
but in 94 it was like science fiction.
That's the sort of problem they're
grappling with that I mean, people don't
even can't even really wrap their mind
around what it means to genetically
modify something.
>> Um, yeah.
>> And so that I feel like the the backlash
has shifted over time. the but the
initial backlash a lot of the initial
backlash is simply a kind of
mystification
about
>> also I was I was thinking about the
flavor saver tomato is 1994 Jurassic
Park comes out in 1993 so it's like if
you have a cultural reference point for
what the scientists are doing it's like
dinosaurs we're going to eat you alive
you're kind of like that's we're not
supposed to be doing that right
>> it fits in with you know there's a
there's a kind of moral element which we
don't see as much today that we should
not be disrupting God's creation in this
way.
>> So Steve talks about this actually they
begin to bring people in to actually
encounter the tomato the zenica tomato
and study how they respond to it in
these focus groups would people try the
tomato can so do you do you recall how
people would react when they tasted it?
>> Yeah. Yeah. This is a great tomato. We I
remember especially cutting them open
there. There was one thing you know
people handle them. And
>> so you you put a tomato in front of a
consumer and you say one of these is
genetically modified.
>> No, not that way. You just start talking
about
how are they grown? Where are they
grown? Are they good for you? What makes
a bad tomato? What makes a good tomato?
You kind of build up to the aha moment.
You do a slow reveal. You know what? If
the best pasta sauce you ever had was
made with a hybrid tomato that had never
been grown before. You You kind of start
off with baby steps
>> and then you're like, "This is tomato.
This is a new this is a new
hybrid tomato." Then
we just kept going deeper and deeper
into the story until we find found the
point where they pushed back that okay
now now you've crossed a line where was
that
>> you've got scientists who are not just
breeding these aren't aronomists and
agricultural specialists this is like
stuff in the lab where you're modifying
the seed genetically I mean these were
words that were not um genetics was not
a common word back then. Uh the word
modified
organism sounded like I remember
consumer science sounded like bugs, you
know, or bacteria or mole, you know,
there were all kinds of
>> three words genetically modified
organism. It's just like a nuclear
>> franken food,
>> right?
came from professor at Boston College
and uh then got picked up by the New
York Times and end up in an op-ed and
off it went.
Lewis wrote, quote, "If they want to
sell us Franken food, perhaps it's time
to gather the villagers, light some
torches, and head to the castle."
Steve basically finds that everybody has
already been freaked out by the name
genetically modified organisms, and they
call it Franken food. Um, and so like
what they try to do at Matson is come up
with this story that says like this is
not really that different than what
we've already done for centuries. Like
think about the way we make apples by
grafting parts of one apple tree onto
another apple tree. And they come up
with these analogies and the thing is
like it just it doesn't really stick
because they've got this name GMOs that
hangs over everything. And and he even
talks about how people just shortened
the acronym, like pronounced it by the
acronym, like they called them GMOs. And
it was this it was like this banner that
nobody could really get past. And what
the banner meant to people is science is
involved in this. There's like some sort
of like hubris. We're treading in a
place where we shouldn't tread. Like
what they were eating may look and taste
like a tomato, but it's it just like in
some fundamental way it's not. there was
some kind of line. What they wanted to
be sure was that the what they were
still eating was truly a tomato. That it
somehow was not so
synthetically bred that it kind of
crossed the line that it was
no longer truly a tomato but some kind
of red delicious fruit.
>> It's a zombie. It's a zombie to me.
>> Yeah, it's it is it is they they have
attached one of the most kind of um
elemental
uh dystopian human fantasies.
>> Right. Right. This thing looks like what
I'm familiar with, but actually
>> Yes. It has the appearance of normality,
but inside there is something foreign.
And I mean every, you know, the there's
a huge category of sci-fi movies that
are just about this thing.
>> Yes. They they're everyone's worried
that they made the zombie tomato. And I
think basically it's like however good
the analogy is, it's like Zenica's
tomato loses out. Like at one point it
has a 60s something% uh it sells way
better than like the average tomato
puree in UK supermarkets. Uh and then
after some of the backlash to the flavor
saver tomato, Zenica like vastly loses
market share. It plummets and now you
can't get a Zenica GMO tomato on the
market. I'm sure there are all kinds of
reasons, but like a big one is that
there's this huge resistance to GMOs,
Franken food GMOs.
>> Wait, so when I buy tomatoes in the in
the supermarket today, are none of them
GMO?
>> I don't think that none of them are GMO,
but I suspect that the vast majority are
not GMO, which honestly I get. I think
if you gave me a choice, I would prefer
a naturally occurring tomato, which is
not something I'm proud of. But there is
something about the intensity of the
anti-GMO thing that I relate less to.
This morning I open up my morning yogurt
and when I open the lid on the lid it
says made from milk from non-GMO cows.
It's like and it's sort of like
screaming this thing at me that I like
it was a question I wasn't even asking
and it's just like oh or I had I had
like I made my friend mutter paneer the
other night and I used this these like
this chili spice I had and it says like
non-GMO chili and I was like that's it
was didn't even occur to me that this
might be GMO chili like it's become this
rallying cry where whatever Matson
wanted to happen whatever Zenica wanted
to happen with the way people would
respond respond to GMOs, the exact
opposite happened. And it's because I
think like they never could change the
name.
>> The first time I heard Franken food, I
was like, "Okay, this is bad." Words are
very powerful. And um for whatever
reason, I think it was a hard stop.
So, all of this brings us to our second
mistake, the one that we are that Barb
is trying to stop us from making again,
which is it's 2018. She goes to this
conference and it's all about this thing
called lab grown meat and she's sitting
there getting all excited about this
technology and then hearing this word
thrown around and she's just like, "Oh
no, we're about to do it again."
Whiplash.
Whiplash. Um, maybe this is a this is a
good time for a commercial break. Okay,
we'll be right back.
All right. So, back with Barb at the lab
grown meat conference and she keeps
hearing these names for it, lab grown
meat, cell-based meat, and she's like,
"It's happening again."
>> So, how did you go about trying to solve
this problem? Because you basically
let's not make the GMO mistake twice.
>> That's right. It was really a rallying
cry for everyone on the team.
>> Imagine if it were lab grown organisms.
>> It even made that makes my stomach like
not so happy.
>> So she starts doing the Matson thing.
She gets a bunch of people together in a
room. She starts testing. How do you
feel about this? What do you think? How
does it look to you? It was one of my
friends that I was trying to explain the
technology to her and she said, "Oh, no.
I don't think God wants us to eat that."
>> Interesting.
>> Yes. One of my friends I I don't even
know how to explain it, but it it did
occur to me that there could be some um
very different opinions. And turns out
that even to this day, there is a very
political
skew for whether or not you're
interested in this kind of a product.
>> Florida, in fact, has banned
>> this product and Alabama and
>> Yes. So, yeah, but it's it's now become
a political issue. So, it's like a like
a religious thing that has become
political. Somehow in a weird way it's
like it it plays in the cluster of
neurons that has something to do with
abortion also. Like there's like in
vitro is a word that applies to both of
these to to the gray areas of both of
these universes.
>> I I would say you know the the ven
diagram of people who are um
anti-abortion are going to be anti-
cultivated meat too.
>> That's really interesting. Anti- labro
meat. So what does she does she have a
term that she wants to use?
>> Uh she gets these people together to
start thinking about the story and what
name can emerge from the story. Some
were better than others.
>> Okay.
Well, here's
>> I'm sorry. Nanoastured meat got five
votes.
What?
>> Unbounded meat. Slaughter-free
propagated
minimalist agriculture.
>> I don't remember these.
>> Celebration. No,
>> no, definitely not.
>> You know, we went through this huge list
of names. I think she has something like
a hundred. And it is a really hard
problem to solve like what to name this
thing because the whole challenge is you
have to come up with a new name for a
thing that doesn't foreground the fact
that this is a new thing.
>> Yeah.
>> And and and and there's just this that
paradox inherent in the project, right?
So then so then the question is meat
like what is how do you package it such
that it's not like they're lying to me.
This was grown in a lab. You're like
this is slightly different. But they do
land on this one name that splits the
difference. I think pretty well. Do you
remember when you hit on the one that
you landed on?
>> We had a a short list and I think once
we got to the short list, it seemed like
a no-brainer.
>> And what was it?
>> And that was cultivated meat.
>> How does How does that name strike you?
>> Well, on the list of names that you that
she was considering, the one I like the
most was minimalist meat.
uh
>> because it's it's it's it's the it's the
claim about it's more about it's
foregrounding
the benefits
>> and also it's capturing the kind of
virtue of this which is this is meat
that's leaving a much smaller footprint
on everything. It's it's and minimalist
suggests a kind of clarity and elegance
and simplicity in the way it's produced.
I mean, the bit about cattle farming is
it's insanely messy and convoluted. I
don't know. I like that, but I'm not,
you know, I would be I'm not I'm not the
typical consumer here. I'm I was already
pro this before I even needed a new
name.
>> Same. Yeah. But I think like minimalist
I would I like minimalists. I like
cultivated.
>> You like cultivated.
>> I like cultivated.
>> Yeah.
>> I like it. Well, there is a lovely play
on a cultivated person as a
sophisticated, you know, as a kind of
person of elegance.
>> Well, and I think also like there's
there's the old truism about law making
and food, you know, how the sausage gets
made.
>> The lesson of which is that nobody
nobody wants to know how the sausage
gets made. That the sausage becomes less
appetizing if you know how it gets made.
Yeah. And so there's so many like
genetically modified organism really
spells out how the sausage gets made.
Lab grown meat spells out how the
sausage gets made. Cultivated meat I
think is obscuring
that in an, you know, it signals that
it's different. It's not
misrepresenting, but it's also not like
throwing the petri dish in your face,
which I think is kind of crucial because
at the end of the day, people basically
don't want to know a lot about how their
food gets to them.
>> But that is why she's trying to change
the name. Exactly. Because it's it's
like, can you obscure? Is there a way to
like hide the words that make it clear
that this is an innovation and not just
like the way things should be?
>> She's absolutely right.
>> And I agree. I remember being really
excited and being like, I can't wait to
try that. Um, and so obviously because
Matson has the necessary connections, I
went to try it.
>> Oh, you tried it?
>> I tried it.
>> Oh my god, I didn't know that. No, now I
feel even more
bummed about letting you go.
>> So, I did I I I had to try I had to try
live grilled meat. Sorry.
>> Ben, cultivated meat.
>> So, the I would say the cultivated meat
industry is uh somewhat downtrodden
these days, but there are still people
doing this and figuring out how to scale
it. And and the big one is a place
called Upside Foods. Um so they are
conveniently located in Emoryville.
>> Mhm.
>> So also in the Bay Area. Um, and I went
there and they have these like huge
tanks and I think they're like stainless
steel tanks basically on on an
industrial floor. And in these tanks
they are using cells taken from a
chicken egg years ago to brew cultivate
this meat at scale
>> chicken
>> and chicken in this case. Mhm.
>> And so I met with a woman there named
Aaron Santi, vice president of PR and
communications at Upside Foods.
>> Honestly, I think the number one thing
to me is tasting is believing, right? Um
people ask us all the time, what does it
taste like? And the most common thing
someone says after they try it, we'll
we'll see. I'm preempting this before
you try it.
>> Tastes like chicken.
>> Tastes like chicken. And we say funny
thing that because it is chicken, right?
Um and I think that's a big part of it.
I mean, at the end of the day, what we
do and the the innovation that has led
to us being able to do this has tons of
science and technology at its core, but
ultimately we make food. It's something
you eat. And so, what better way to have
you connect with that than have the
opportunity to try it?
>> So, you go in there and they prepare in
front of you. They take their meat and
it looks just like chicken.
>> Tell me, tell me what I'm looking at.
>> Yes. Okay. So, we have a little
appetizer, which is a butter chicken
samosa. And then this is a buttermilk
fried chicken sandwich.
>> Both look like the normal version of the
product.
>> And it's got a little um mint chutney on
top.
Okay, that is delicious.
>> Did I call it Does it taste like
chicken?
>> That That is seriously delicious. It's
really good.
>> It was incredible. It tasted exactly
like normal chicken. Granted, they have
a very excellent chef on staff, but if
if you had not told me, if I were not in
this pristine futuristic place where
they're making this thing, if I didn't
know the whole story, I would have had
no questions. I I would not have
wondered was this chicken produced
differently than the chicken I get at a
fast food place that comes from god
knows where.
>> What did the people at Upside say about
the name in question? What do they call
it?
>> They call it cultivated meat.
>> So Barb won the has won the day. Barb
was able to basically get like a
coalition of people together through the
the people who are hosting that
conference and like get a lot of buyin
from the people in this space to like
use this term cultivated meat. And so
we'll see what happens in the future if
they if that can actually that plus the
storytelling around it can actually
overcome people's anxieties. Um, but to
me, I think like what Upside seem
committed to is the idea that like
tasting is believing.
>> That where they want to start here is
not in packaged goods that you get off
the shelf, but basically like with
restaurants.
>> So, you will go to a restaurant, you'll
try this, you'll know you're trying
something different, and you'll have the
experience that I had, which is like,
okay, this is like it's it's quite good.
And and like in no way does it taste
different to me.
>> Do they think they'll be safer?
Do you get do you get salmonella
outbreaks and there's no antibiotics
obviously in
>> you don't get salmonella outbreaks from
from cultivated meat?
>> Yeah.
>> And and in fact there are like in the
future you could imagine things like low
cholesterol beef.
>> So if you like for if your doctor says
like cut down your cholesterol but you
want to keep eating beef like there are
ways to handle this process such that
you make a healthier piece of meat. Um,
so they're now doing this at scale, a
greater scale than they've ever done
before. And then it'll be a question of
can we get the story right? Can we get
the communication right?
>> Yeah.
>> Um, and I think cultivated meat, we'll
see, but at least it's an attempt to not
make the same mistake twice.
>> I am so down for this. I wish Barb good
luck in her campaign. And I um I for one
will be lining up to have my cultivated
steak.
>> Yeah. Let's just hope that when that
steak hits the market, there's a name in
the story that makes you want to eat it.
Revisionist History is produced by Nina
Bird Lawrence and Lucy Sullivan. Our
editor is Karen Shakuri. Factchecking by
Angelie Marcato. Our executive producer
is Jacob Smith. Engineering by Nina Bird
Lawrence. Original music by Luis Scara.
Sound design and mastering by Marcelo
dea.
Special thanks to Justin Shimik. I'm Ben
Natafrey.